okay so let me ask you this do you not
have kind of
throwaway activities you do in leisure
time like would
wouldn't this argument against video
games wouldn't it be applicable to say
somebody who likes to do and use adult
coloring books
you know i mean like some activity that
they enjoy they sort of have blocked off
an
hour a day there's some sort of leisure
activity that's
kind of pointless but they get something
out of it enriches their life it makes
them feel good for an hour
let's let's say you rent an apartment
and you have a roommate
somebody you don't know very well and
then every so often you get up to go to
the bathroom in the middle of the night
and you see them sitting there at the
kitchen counter
at two o'clock in the morning filling in
adult coloring books
no no no but i mean just just think
about it what would you what would your
opinion be of your roommate
like bro what is wrong with you you're
staying up till 2am
and then maybe you go to sleep and you
wake up to have breakfast like you wake
up early because
that's your job you wake up at 6 00 a.m
and like did you did you go to sleep
last night you seem to still be sitting
there
working on that combo now i don't know
of anyone in the universe
i don't know if there's one person out
of 300 million 400 million in the united
states and canada who actually has this
this problem with adult coloring books
that would seem to me an incredibly rare
thing
we all know we all know what's common
with video games like
most people in this audience they know
what it's like to stay up till 2 a.m
playing a video game and they may know
what it's like to stay up till 6 a.m or
to find their
their room like this is this is common
this is widespread
not everyone can research the cure for
cancer not everyone can live a life as
exciting as mine i went to cambodia and
did humanitarian work i did research you
know my life is interesting in different
ways
i get that but like my perspective is
you still matter i still care about you
i still care about what you could be
doing productively with those three
hours a day
i don't accept the notion that you have
zero creativity
zero potential whether that's
politically or otherwise to make the
world a better place
zero artistic potential whatever i
really believe that
you can do something better with those
three hours a day and if you don't
believe it
what do you think of yourself i mean
really people like to disrespect my crew
but the fact is that you know my name
and i don't know you
i don't know i know if you're gonna have
grandkids but if you do
your grandkids will ask you what did you
do in the year 2020.
this is one of those years it's been
such a crazy year
it'll come up whether your children are
great someday deal with oh
what happened during the great riots of
2020 the great fire
of 2020.
and i'll say i was sitting in this room
talking to people on the internet
and your grandkids maybe can watch those
those videos too
it's good to have you back we're live
folks and people in the chat are
wondering yes this is live
um and we're here we're gonna talk about
a lot of stuff
we had a conversation last week uh
covered some things i had a bunch of
other things i wanted to talk about so
we set up round
two yeah so we're gonna get into a bunch
of stuff um so
let's i wanna start on something that's
kind of relevant to the platform that
we're
on here now as you probably know twitch
is largely a gaming platform
it's kind of changed more recently but
the core
twitch community is really connected to
gaming and that's kind of how this whole
thing started
and you are a very vocal advocate for
sort of i don't know what you call
anti-gaming you quitting gaming in
general
so it's kind of an interesting place to
have you here on this in this gaming
zone as somebody who
you have a whole playlist on your
channel that's sort of i believe it's
now 44 videos
talking about quitting video games and
the significance of video games in our
lives yeah
there we go 44 videos about video games
a lot of them
sort of urging the viewer to quit video
games and i would say within the last
say two or three years maybe the
majority of the fan mail i get
i mean it's hard to say i get fan mail i
get fan mail many different kinds but a
lot of the fan mail i know it's 30
or what um with people writing in to say
that i changed their lives
it has to do with video games people
send me long messages i could read you
two that i received in the last
48 hours of people saying hey
your youtube channel changed my life and
here's why you got me thinking about
quitting video games and what is
a meaningful life and i made these
changes where people really do right
into me let me know
that that mattered to them in a big way
yeah which is surprising because as you
know my youtube channel is about a lot
of things
that's just that's just one that's come
up over uh over five years
most of these guys agree with me they
just don't want it's like if you talk to
someone who wants to quit smoking or
they're aware put it this way
someone who is aware they should quit
smoking but they don't want to
most of it's in that gray area where
it's like well yeah
i could and should be doing something
better with my time just whether or not
i'm going to do it so it's the addictive
it's the addictive aspect
of what i'm kind of hearing like so just
just to keep going
i'd be curious for you to or let's stop
there is it the addictive
aspect how does the addict like if you
eliminated
the addictiveness if somebody's playing
video games that for whatever reason the
selections they're making
are these sort of inherently
non-addictive games maybe they're really
narrative driven
and it's it's much more like an
interactive film and they're
appreciating it not as like an escape
or just like this sort of physical like
enjoyment of moving around
but it's basically like an interactive
story and they're experiencing it like a
piece of art and they're taking they're
not getting educational value
but they're getting sort of cultural
value out of it would you still have a
same kind of problem with that since
we're eliminating the addictiveness
factor
so uh i had an email about this this
morning from someone
i'm gonna summarize the email real
quickly he wrote in and he thanked me
for my videos he said my videos were
like a positive
inspiration for him blah blah and he
said he partly agrees with and partly
disagrees with what i have to say about
about video games including video games
as follows he
is someone this guy writing to me this
viewer
he is someone who has struggled his
whole life with video game addiction
and he feels that with video games
either you quit 100 percent
or you're an addict because in his
experience when he's tried to play only
a moderate amount of games
the addiction takes over his life and
he's quit repeatedly and relapsed
repeatedly
this is his situation that's that's his
experience and that's this also brings a
certain kind of bias
i think to the situation okay and he
said
something very similar he said that he
feels there would be nothing wrong with
video games
if they were not addictive and he asked
me do i feel this way
so i wrote back and i said no
i think that what you do with those
three hours a day
really matters you know i think it
really matters this is a question of
what difference you can make in the
world what you can learn what kind of
person you become
who you really are and i think it
matters even if video games are
completely
non-addictive and probably some video
games are non-addictive or some people
don't find them if we're talking about
you know the original asteroids game for
the atari 2600
talking about the original zork for
ms-dos like
you know some video games they're
they're more primitive than a card game
and i think less addictive
than card games and let's keep in mind
gambling and card games and dice
people find these addictive even though
the graphics aren't all that impressive
um so without those those storytelling
things you know
um look my girlfriend
who's sitting here right off camera she
got like
10 of the value of her university
education when she was a normal
university age student because she was
playing video games
now not only she also watched a lot of
sitcoms a lot of tv shows she had other
distractions in her life
but like okay you had this short period
in life which for most people is the
only chance they ever have
to really learn something about history
and politics
and to gain a metier to become a you
know somewhat refined
person also to make decisions that are
gonna affect your career
your ability and money for the rest of
your life you had this one brief period
of four years of your life and you
squandered it playing video games
now my girlfriend is far
from the worst example of this i don't
think she would even qualify as an
addict
i think she just qualified as a video
game player she was someone who
regularly played
there were you know if there were people
whose lives are completely ruined by
video game addiction when they move out
of the hou their parents house
and go to universities it's not just
common i think it's at epidemic levels
but not everyone's a university student
everyone has some meaningful obligations
in their life and something they can
learn and something they can accomplish
for most of us it's it's more and better
than being a
university student i mean i don't by the
way i don't uh romanticize university
if i buckle down and read the books on
this shelf just
it's not that big a shelf i can learn
more than what's in a normal four-year
university education if i if i have a
full-time job but i take three hours a
day to really study or really learn
something to really apply myself and
focus my mind
instead of spending three hours a day
playing video games that changes who i
am it doesn't just change what i know it
changes what kind of difference i can
i can make in the world so obviously
that's kind of easy to prove
if you're talking about a high school
student or university student who's
squandering their only chances in
education
playing video games but each of us is
squandering our chances
right now and those chances those
opportunities
they may not be as self-evident as as
being enrolled in a university program
and for me that problem
doesn't change whether or not it's
addictive
i've never known anyone who goes skiing
for three hours a day
you know something that's completely
non-addictive could in theory
have that role in somebody's life but
for my generation
the epidemic is specifically video games
okay so let me ask you this
do you not have kind of throwaway
activities you do in leisure time like
would
wouldn't this argument against video
games wouldn't it be applicable to say
somebody who likes to do and use adult
coloring books
i mean like some activity that they
enjoy they sort of have blocked off an
hour a day of this some sort of leisure
activity that's
kind of pointless but they get something
out of it enriches their life it makes
them feel good for an hour
let's let's say you rent an apartment
and you have a roommate
somebody you don't know very well and
then every so often you get up to go to
the bathroom in the middle of the night
and you see them sitting there at the
kitchen counter
at two o'clock in the morning filling in
adult coloring books
no no no but i mean just just think
about it what would you what would your
opinion be of your roommate
like bro what is wrong with you you're
staying up till 2 am
and then maybe you go to sleep and you
wake up to have breakfast like you wake
up early because
that's your job you wake up at 6 00 a.m
and like did you did you go to sleep
last night you seem to still be sitting
there
working on that conqueror now i don't
know if anyone in the unit like i don't
know if there's one person
out of 300 million 400 million in the
united states and canada who actually
has this
this problem with adult coloring books
that would seem to me an incredibly rare
thing
we all know we all know what's common
with video games like
most people in this audience they know
what it's like to stay up till 2 a.m
playing a video game and they may know
what it's like to stay up till 6 a.m or
to find their
their room like this is this is common
this is widespread
i do think you know like eating soap
you can have some small amount of this
in your life
but it's really still important to
recognize that it's bad like the fact
that you can tolerate a small amount of
soap in your diet you can eat the soap
that happens to be on your
on your dishware doesn't mean eating
soap is a good thing doesn't mean it's
something you you want to be making
excuses for
and to recognize you know
for my generation there's nothing else
comparable to video games for my
grandfather's generation
it was a deck of cards it was dice it
was going to the race track
grown men used to neglect their children
to go and watch horses run in a circle
like can you
you want to do that you want to go it's
ridiculous you know today that's an
incredibly rare
hobby you know if people do this for our
generation the challenge is video games
so that's why it's the
that's why it's the challenge that i'm
that i'm addressing
so the the argument that's kind of
coming up in the chat and it's crossed
my mind as well
is basically that
it's so again you're kind of referring
to how addictive it is so it seems it
seems as though it's these
particularly addictive qualities that
come with most video games if not
arguably all of them
i think you could argue either way with
that it's just certain games and those
other ones are
a little more safe and then i think
other people could argue that just video
games in general are sort of addictive
in any event um
it's still kind of like it's like why
again if if somebody is able to
who find a way to engage with video
games i mean for me personally i
agree with you and for the most part i
kind of eliminated video games in my
life
in my mid-20s because i saw it was just
like training my time
uh but there's certain video game
creators that i love
that i kind of look at as like an artist
the way i would like it the director
that i like puts on film
so recently maybe a year ago this guy
made this video game called death
stranding that was
it's like a real weird art piece of a
video game and i
broke my video game retirement played it
for like a month
beat it and it was like it was like
experiencing a long movie over the
course of this like month i'd play a
couple hours a day
and uh you know i've walked i didn't
play i haven't played anything since and
it was just like this
one-off experience where i just like
wanted to enjoy this piece of video game
art and i don't think it
impacted my life in a negative way so do
you think that do you
leave wiggle room for stuff like that
where somebody kind of thinks it through
and tries to protect themselves from the
counterproductive qualities the
addictive qualities and tries to engage
with video games more as like
art where's that people see problems in
that approach right
so i i pretty much reject the category
of
of leisure and the concept of of leisure
i look at all the things in our life as
educational
even if they're just barely educational
so with a mainstream video game of this
i'm sorry i don't know the number for
death stranding
but for something like a zelda game
you're normally talking about 200 hours
so i'm sorry if death training is only
40 hours it was long it was it was
something like
100 hours okay yeah so i mean most of
the big mainstream triple-a totals 100
hours 200 hours
people complain if a game is only is
only
40 hours um
how many hours would it take out of your
life
to go to egypt and see the pyramids
not terribly meaningful like that's not
the same as learning
latin or learning chinese or studying
the history of the french revolution
like it's it's not going to change your
life
you could you could go to egypt and see
the pyramids and you know what
the amount of time we're talking about
is so great you could even include
the number of hours you spent working at
starbucks
earning 15 an hour to save the money
to go to egypt and you could look at how
many hours that was you know i bet
egypt's
far away it's expensive wherever you're
watching this wherever you're living
you know if you live in england there's
some museum you could have gone to
in england now you know going to a
museum
it's leisure it's educated it's not hard
work
it's not like sitting down and focusing
your mind to study chinese or study
history or study to
study to get your degree as a registered
accountant or something get some kind of
uh some kind of credential you know but
when you're really looking at what you
do with your life as educational again
whether you like it or not
okay give an example let's raise the
stakes a little
sleeping with prostitutes i'm
i'm not going to deny that sleeping with
prostitutes
could be enjoyable it could also be
horrifying
you know frankly i don't believe that
aside but you know
when i have known men who got accustomed
to sleeping with prostitutes that was a
habit they took online
it changes who they are and it's not
shallow
like on a profound level over time
over years of making these compromises
and getting used to this and
that becomes part of who they are it
shapes and reshapes who they are
in a manner that i find frankly kind of
terrifying right
and you could totally say hey it's just
a hobby and it's way less than 200 hours
nobody's wealthy enough
to you know be spending 200 hours
prostitutes but you know even if they
have the money it's it's only a few
hours here and there and you say
wow this has really changed who he has
this has changed of course
how he sees women his relationship with
women he's changed him
his ethical character in a lot of ways i
do
really think there's an important
argument to look at how you're spending
your time
if it's 200 hours uh playing zelda or
100 hours
playing death stranding and to look at
this is who i am this is
how i'm training my mind this is who i'm
training myself to be
and you know no not everything can be
compared to
finding the cure for cancer not
everything can be compared to studying
chinese
it's true but yeah you could have gotten
up and walked around
a museum you could have gone to egypt
you could you know
there are there are a lot of things you
could do that most people would perceive
as
leisure or enjoyable um
but i i think there's both the sense in
which they would make you a better
person
in some subtle way and then again
whether you're talking about
prostitution or playing video games
i think there's a really profound sort
of corruption that creeps in there
i think there's an important sense in
which these particular habits
are uh with time you know eroding
your moral character so why
i know from your videos you've watched
game of thrones
yes yep but why is you watching game of
thrones different
than somebody who's able to let's say
holistically juggle their video game
consumption in a way where it's
really the same amount of time they find
some game they spend an hour
it de-stresses them they keep it to an
hour every couple days
why is that bit of cultural absorption
that you experienced
through game of thrones different than
somebody else spending the exact same
amount of time
except on a similarly narrative artistic
oriented video game so game of thrones i
think that was let's say 10 hours per
year
i'm sorry i think some years they had 12
episodes and some hours they had some
years they had eight episodes
so 12 hours per
year not per month per year if i met
someone
and i think it was what was it over
spread over then eight years
or something right seven or eight years
the show
okay 12 hours per year that's your video
game happen
i i agree that's not going to be a
problem that's not going to impact your
life
and you know the other differences with
some of these activities uh that i do
that people may think waste time
is of course whether or not you're doing
something else with it simultaneously
like i can listen to the news
while lifting weights at the gym i don't
think i have a news habit i don't think
i have a gym habit either
sure all these things can be evaluated
this way
but what are you evaluating question is
what kind of person do you want to be
and now what are you willing to do to
make it happen there's certainly some
people in the chat that don't seem
uh we get mixed bag in the chat but
anyway yeah no but and this is twitch i
mean i know i'm coming into their space
and that's
and that's cool you know uh
not everyone can be a medical doctor not
everyone can research the cure for
cancer
not everyone can live a life as exciting
as mine i went to cambodia and did
humanitarian work i did research you
know my life is interesting in different
ways
i get that but like my perspective is
you still matter i still care about you
i still care about what you could be
doing productively with those three
hours a day
i don't accept the notion that you have
zero creativity
zero potential whether that's
politically or otherwise to make the
world a better place
zero artistic potential whatever i
really believe that
you can do something better with those
three hours a day and if you don't
believe it
what do you think of yourself like how
low is your self-esteem
how low is your opinion of yourself if
you really don't believe
you have something better to do some
aspiration some ambition
some potential something you could do
with three hours a day or
20 hours a week or whatever it is it
adds up to with video games
because like i get it um i had a friend
who got laid out in the hospital
he was totally better at nil and they
had him on these
drugs painkillers they rewired his jaw
so he couldn't even talk and you know he
played video he
he couldn't stand up he couldn't go to
the bathroom he couldn't talk
and you know like while he's doing that
he's playing videos okay
but then at some point after he's
recovered right it's a relatively short
time
that he's that you know better okay look
dude you know you gotta you've gotta
get over this like you've gotten a
little bit too comfortable with spending
so many hours a day playing video games
you gotta
you know look dude you know you got to
get off the drugs you got to get off the
painkillers you got to stop making
excuses
you got to get some aspiration ambition
to to do something with your life
uh don't let this temporary injury and
being bed real become an excuse for
living your whole life as a mental and
physical [ __ ] playing video games
why do you think like what are the
components we've obviously covered
addiction
video games clearly you know a lot of
them by design
are addictive are there other components
like if working out was addictive which
it is kind of is for some
i don't think he would be railing
against uh
weightlifting addiction no i am oh sure
i'm against all of it no i'm against
skiing i'm against all kinds of things
sure
but it's not an epidemic for my
generation and no it's it's possible i
would have a friend
who was addicted to working out i have
one friend who is an ex-bodybuilder and
he talked to me about that and he said
look it was just so many hours per day
and destroying his life and his
strongest intellectual development
and now uh anyway now he's a university
student he is he does lead a very
intellectual life
but no it's it's theoretically possible
and once in a long while you could meet
someone
with those with those other uh those
other problems sure
okay so what i'm getting at is that
it is sort of like i wanna i'm curious
to understand what what is it about
video games
outside of the fact that it's addictive
um what is it
what is it the actual act of playing
video games that you think is sort of
destructive to a person's psyche
because i imagine i don't know that i've
heard you speak about this but i
it's sort of a lot of the arguments i've
heard from you maybe i watch the wrong
videos
it's there's sort of this assumption
that playing video games is going to be
degenerative in some way or it's going
to affect you negatively
and i'm curious outside of it being
addictive and
arguably wasting your time is there more
to it from your perspective is there
something about the mechanics of
engaging with like a virtual world that
you think is unhealthy
yes what what's going on in your mind as
great question and
probably i have answered in one of my 44
videos on the topic but there's
i probably couldn't find the video where
answer it anyway no uh
you know one of the ways i've addressed
this in the past
is to ask well if you think this is
something good for a human being to do
let's narrow down
what kind of person that would be um
if you have a brother
who is so severely mentally [ __ ]
that he can't attend school he can't
have any kind of career
let's say he's learning disabled in a
way where he really can't read
i can imagine having a relative in my
family who's just
so disabled that you think well you know
for timmy
there's not much else he can enjoy in
life so i guess
i guess it's playing video games i guess
this is about the best they can do
right and on the other hand think about
the kind of person
for whom it would be a terrible waste of
their talent of their creativity
of what they could be learning or what
they could be teaching or the difference
they could make in the world
through political activism or anything
at all or through painting a picture
right you think boy what a tragedy to
this person instead of
doing all these things acting on this
potential they had
that instead they became a video game
addict they spent all their time
playing video games ultimately the
question
is of what kind of person do you want to
be
and to recognize that what you do in
your so-called leisure time which i
would just call
time what you do with your time
that is making you into that person
that's who you're going to become
you are training yourself you are
educating yourself all the time and just
mention
i had a guy writing to me the other day
asking about becoming a lawyer
i think he's pretty much made up his
mind he's going to go can i go to law
school
if you think about the education you
undergo the change of your character the
way you're going to change and become a
different person
after so many years in law school right
that also
has to be thought about seriously i
signed up to join the army at one point
i had to really think about that if i go
into the army now
what kind of person am i going to be
after five years right and all the kind
of
uh low-level trauma you deal with the
day out of the army if it's just you
know guys shouting at each other
you know just kind of needless
aggression and hostility
you know through the men or whatever i'm
going to live in that environment
and deal with those things and go to
iraq and then i'm going to come back
even if you're assuming you don't
actually kill anyone what if you become
a police officer
all of these things bring with them
self-discipline
habits of mind and also elements of your
life that maybe become reckless
maybe forms of self-indulgence and
recklessness you get into to try to
balance or compensate for
the strain the stress the
self-discipline sure everything can be
evaluated
the same way that i'm evaluating video
games
if you quit video games how is it
possible
that you were gonna replace those three
hours of your time
with something worse with something
that's more detrimental to your
character
i've had people writing in to ask me
i've had people writing in and claiming
that if they quit video games they're
going to do something way worse
i'm like try me what what is what is
this worst thing you're going to do
like if if somebody says to me i've
never had this happen if someone says to
me they would love to get on a vegan
diet
but they were afraid that if they quit
eating you know
pork rinds and bacon and
hot dogs that they're just gonna eat
something even worse for their health
it's like really what what is it
it's possible it's possible you have a
vegan diet you just buy a bag of sugar
and you sit there with a spoon eating
sugar straight out of the bag like it's
possible that but like what is it you
think like
because from my perspective when you
talk about playing video games and
let's face it playing often combined
with marijuana
and other mind-altering drugs you know
every time we're playing video games um
what is it you would replace it with
that's worse if you're just sitting on
the couch
thinking about how unhappy you are and
how you want to change your life how
dissatisfied you are with your job
how you're not learning anything even
that dissatisfaction even sitting and
reflecting on how miserable your life is
for three hours
i think is way more productive than
video games and it's gonna lead to more
creative more positive stuff in your
life
because you're going to act on it and
smoking marijuana and
playing video games it's going to lead
to inaction and justification for the
stasis
in the rest of your life that that's my
perspective
okay one of the things i said in the
debate about this was um
eating soap is bad
however if you wash the dishes or you
eat in a restaurant
where the dishes are washed by someone
not paying much attention you probably
are eating tiny amounts of soap with
every meal
i am not going to claim that playing
video games for five minutes
or 15 minutes in a day has the same
significance as
three hours a day but if you know people
who
play video games three hours is actually
quite quite a modest
estimate most people a lot of people lie
to themselves and lie to their friends
for a lot of people it's much more than
three hours it really is what their life
rolls around so when you say something
is bad you say something is a waste of
time
how bad how much time those quantitative
considerations really do matter
um i you know you so you talk about an
elevator pitch
some people play video games while
they're standing in the elevator
you know i get it okay so this is five
minutes a day playing candy crush
all right if that's really all it is
honestly still there's something better
you could be thinking about or doing
while you're in the elevator but i have
to concede the point when the quantity
is that low
the qualitative nature of the argument
changes but for my generation
for my generation this is like an
epidemic level of people playing video
games for
three hours a day and more sometimes
much much more so it really matters it's
a decision we really have to make for
ourselves
there's people that are kind of wanting
to get into the the micro of this and
sort of how do you decide what's like
and i don't know if you want to
necessarily go on that road because i
feel like we're kind of uh
we've kind of reached an end on this on
this point i suppose
from my understanding so people are kind
of taking this into a very
black and white thing where it's kind of
like sort of the assumption that you
believe
that everything needs to be productive
but the fact that you did watch game of
thrones i'm sure there's other examples
you clearly saved some room for just
culture and enjoyment and whatever
you're not like
hardcore 100 utilitarian or whatever you
call it
right but look you know so totally good
question i'm not offended by any of
these questions when people ask me this
stuff
i don't get defensive i'm i'm genuinely
happy
to answer those questions uh as a
parallelism you know when i was living
in england
there were a lot of really negative
attitudes about men's relationships with
women
like where men would really say things i
saw this written in newspapers i mostly
thought
like in articles british men had this
attitude of like oh no
uh keep her keen treat her mean like
don't don't do anything to help
your wife that she wouldn't do to help
you this really grudging
transactional view of dating whether
it's girlfriends or wives or
or what have you and i remember reading
several call wasn't was in a mainstream
newspaper remember reason this
and i said to my wife at the time does
it ever occur to them
to try doing the opposite does it ever
occur to them have a relationship
where you give all that you can possibly
give
where you do everything to help the
other person you possibly can and then
if they want more
or they're dissatisfied or they complain
you get to say to them
i'm doing everything i possibly could
to help you so if that's not good enough
for you
like we gotta break up or we gotta
renegotiate we gotta talk about the
meaning of life here
right like okay so you say well you know
it can't be a hundred percent
you can't like you know in a
relationship it can't be i can't be a
hundred percent devoted
to helping my girlfriend but i can do
the most i
possibly can i can i can give a hundred
percent of what
what's available right it's not going to
be a hundred percent
her that matters and zero percent of me
that matters in the relationship right
but i can be as giving as possible so if
you ask me
how much how much time and energy can
you commit to
flying to a third world country doing
humanitarian
work like on a volunteer basis uh doing
historical research
learning two languages like how much how
much
you can give it as much as you possibly
can and then you can have the
satisfaction of exhausting yourself
we say look i gave and gave and gave i
poured my energy into this
i poured my heart into it and when there
was nothing left to pour
i ran out so i watched an episode of the
simpsons
like deadass exhausted you can have the
satisfaction of doing the utmost
you possibly can now ask yourself what
if you've done that university
what if instead of dragging your ass
through introduction to plato's
philosophy
401 what if you had given it 110 percent
and then only watch the simpsons
afterwards or play videos afterwards
as opposed to doing the bare minimum
you had to in your university courses so
that you could play video games as much
as possible
as opposed to rushing through your meals
like oh i want to spend as little time
as possible
cooking and eating this meal so i can go
play video games the reality is that for
most of us i remember this as a child
we dream about video games you play them
for enough hours what you see when you
close your eyes and go to sleep
you plan your day around videos even if
you're not planning
it becomes your highest priority right
and you never develop
a sensitivity to what is lost and you're
losing all those things
you're losing your relationship with
your girlfriend it's not what it should
be or could be because you're not giving
that 110
you're losing what you could have
learned in university what you could
have done what you could have
accomplished
it never even occurred to you to do
humanitarian work or learn another
language
or do research or go to cambodia or go
to egypt and see ancient ruins
none of these things and in terms of
creativity it's maybe the saddest part
of all
you know to have creativity you need to
have a blank canvas
you've got to have enough empty space in
your life to be creative too right and
then to give that
100 all these things disappear
because of video games could they
disappear because you're addicted to
gambling
or you're addicted to watching movies or
you're addicted to watching reruns of
the simpsons
it's possible but keeping it all the way
real from my generation in 2020
this is the epidemic of our times this
is ruining people's lives
and it draws people into a shallow
meaningless life
of short-term thinking and childlike
self-intelligence
all right so a lot of people in the chat
are kind of
i guess um
the the reaction from some not everybody
for some people is is sort of like
as if you you know it's kind of this
sort of you
take game of thrones for example they're
kind of saying like well you watch game
of thrones you could have been doing
more productive things
i think what i'm understanding from
hearing you talk about this more
is that you aren't taking it to those
extremes you do have room
you do reserve room for relaxation
entertainment and all these things
it's for you it's a question of managing
that stuff
look i've had times in my life where i
worked so hard that i i broke down
weeping from the stress i can remember
waking up before 6 a.m
to study cambodian as a language and
cracking up i can remember waking up
around 6am to study chinese for three
hours before i took the bus to
university
to study chinese like i've had times in
my life where i'm
extremely hard-working and pushing
myself to that ragged edge of exhaustion
for whatever it is i want to accomplish
in my life i know i know what it's like
to give 110
to caring for a newborn infant like when
my daughter
the first one year of my daughter's life
i was a stay-at-home parent for
right and by the way with the little
bits of time i had i read
i read really meaningful books i read
herodotus i read thucydides these are
ancient greek
authors i did actually get a little bit
of reading done when my daughter was
napping
and she'd wake up you take care of her
you know like there are
all kinds of different things in my life
i have the experience of giving 110
and by the way when i came up with and
wrote and illustrated a storybook for my
daughter
you know this kind of thing there are
creative things also where you give it
you see okay do you think for one minute
i look back at those times in my life
the most stressful times where i was
pushing it to the extreme even though by
the way today
i can barely speak like in a complete
sentence in cambodia like i've forgotten
that i've studied like
it was a total waste studying cambodia
in many ways by the way
you know a lot of those things like in
the sense i do regret them okay
do you think i look back at that and and
and
you know regret that i didn't own an
xbox 360
at that time that i didn't own a
playstation 3 that i missed out on those
video games
who's really missing out here a lot of
these people you were
a lot of people noticed you were alive
during the same years i was alive but
you were playing xbox 360. i don't
remember i don't wish i'd spent
one moment playing xbox
or playstation instead of caring for my
daughter instead of studying cambodia
instead of pursuing those things
and doing the most i could possibly do
exhaustion is real and i hope everyone
in this audience
knows both the joy and the misery of
exhausting themselves
not because they have a boss or an
overseer
breathing down their neck right like not
because they're like in the military and
they're being bossed around
but because they're really motivated you
know and
maybe motivated partly to accomplish
something yes
but you're also motivated to be a better
person that you're motivated about what
you're going to learn and who you're
going to become
by doing this thing by doing this hard
work because the outcomes they aren't
all
external in the outside world right like
i became the kind of person
who went to cambodia did that have that
experience
the ultimate benefit is that i get to
wake up in the morning and be me
instead of waking up and being some
loser who just stayed in toronto
and played the whole generation of games
that came out for playstation xbox 360.